add basics and the beggining of the attack (#53)
DamnVulnerableCryptoApp/DamnVulnerableCryptoApp: backend/src/documentation/padding-oracle.md

# Padding Oracle Attack

For this section is important that you read and understand the [XOR docs](/docs/xor). 

## The Basics

Firstly, to understand the _padding oracle attack_ also known as _Vaudenay attack_ it is important to know clearly the meaning of **padding** and **oracle**. 

### Padding

> The CBC mode encrypts blocks with the same block length. As you may think, certainly not all the plaintext messages length are a multiple of the cipher block length. So, how this problem can be solved? How a 14-byte message is encrypted where cipher blocks are 8 bytes? One of the techniques used is **padding**.

Reviewer: So, how this problem can -> So, how can this problem

Reviewer: How a 14-byte message is -> How is a

> The CBC mode encrypts blocks with the same block length. As you may think, certainly not all the plaintext messages length are a multiple of the cipher block length. So, how this problem can be solved? How a 14-byte message is encrypted where cipher blocks are 8 bytes? One of the techniques used is **padding**.

Reviewer: So, how this problem -> So, how can this problem

Reviewer: How a 14-byte message is ->  How is a 14-byte message

> The **padding** makes the ciphertext longer than the plaintext to maintain each block with the same size allowing to encrypt a message of any length. For block ciphers, padding is applied according to the [PKCS#7](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#PKCS#5_and_PKCS#7) standard and [RFC 5652](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652#section-6.3). The standard says, the value to pad with is the number of bytes of padding that remains to fill a block. More technically, the message is expanded and extra bytes are added to the plaintext in order to complete a block. 

Reviewer: Its not the padding that makes the ciphertext longer. I would say that padding makes the plaintext longer :p

> The **padding** makes the ciphertext longer than the plaintext to maintain each block with the same size allowing to encrypt a message of any length. For block ciphers, padding is applied according to the [PKCS#7](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#PKCS#5_and_PKCS#7) standard and [RFC 5652](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652#section-6.3). The standard says, the value to pad with is the number of bytes of padding that remains to fill a block. More technically, the message is expanded and extra bytes are added to the plaintext in order to complete a block. 

Reviewer: i wouldn't say the padding makes the ciphertext longer, as it only happens if the padding is the number of bytes in the block. otherwise is making the plaintext longer, which will result in a ciphertext with the expected size, the same if it has 3 byte padding or 4byte padding

> Take in mind that one char is one byte in size. As an example, 8 chars are equal to 8 bytes. 

> For example, let's try to encrypt `FAKEGUY` with a block size of 8 bytes (or 8 characters). The message would be padded to `FAKEGUY\x01`. Why `\x01` at the end? According to the standard mentioned above, if there is one byte to complete the block, the message is padded with `\x01`. If there were two bytes the pad would be with `\x02`. Let's show a practical example of how this works with different message lengths and their pads.

Reviewer: as we agreeed last week, lets do the examples in hex. which also means that each char, is the chars in hex

Reviewer: if there is one byte to complete ->  if there is one byte missing to complete. Its easier to understand

> For example, let's try to encrypt `FAKEGUY` with a block size of 8 bytes (or 8 characters). The message would be padded to `FAKEGUY\x01`. Why `\x01` at the end? According to the standard mentioned above, if there is one byte to complete the block, the message is padded with `\x01`. If there were two bytes the pad would be with `\x02`. Let's show a practical example of how this works with different message lengths and their pads.

Reviewer: As we agreed lets do the examples in hex, also relevant to explain that every two chars in hex represent one byte. Ill work on a doc for that, when done we cna link it here

> _Why adding a pad if the message length is a multiple of the block size?_ 

Well, imagine if your plaintext is literally `POTATO\x02\x02`. How could you distinguish a plaintext which content is `POTATO` (6 bytes) and `POTATO\x02\x02` (the `\x02\x02` at the end it seems  padding, but in reality it's part of the string). As a result, a full length block like `POTATOES` (8 bytes or chars) is padded to `POTATOES\x08\x08\x08\x08\x08\x08\x08\x08`.

### **Oracle**

An Oracle is a system (e.g. Web Application) that accepts arbitrary ciphertexts and it gives **different responses** where the padding in a CBC-encrypted ciphertext is **valid** or **not**. This system will perform cryptographic operations on behalf of the user or attackers like a black box which returns success or error responses. In other words, a padding oracle takes encrypted data or ciphertext from the user, tries to decrypt it, then responds if the padding was correct or not. The attacker can use this information to decrypt the original message.

> Now you have the main knowledge to understand how this attack is performed. Let's get to the point.

## The Attack

> To perform this attack is not needed to know the key, any plaintext or be an expert in math. Just access to a ciphertext you want to decrypt is enough. Firstly, pay attention to the diagram shown below of how the CBC mode decrypts a given ciphertext.

Reviewer: access to the cipher text and access to the decryption method

> To perform this attack is not needed to know the key, any plaintext or be an expert in math. Just access to a ciphertext you want to decrypt is enough. Firstly, pay attention to the diagram shown below of how the CBC mode decrypts a given ciphertext.

Reviewer: You need the ciphertext and the decryption method

> ![CBC Decryption](img/cbc_decrypt.png "CBC Decryption")

Reviewer: This one is probably my fault... as i keep changing this, to work properly on dev,prod and github wikis..
The path to images should be /documentation/img/someimage.png (you will not see the image in the editor

The most relevant point is how each block decryption ends. 

> > **The ciphertext passes throught the block cipher decryption and then its output is XORed with the previous ciphertext block**. The XOR of this two strings with the correct padding gives the plaintext message.

Reviewer: throught -> through

> Image you have made a random request to a web application you use with the following **encrypted cookie value** and you want to decrypt it to know its content:

Reviewer: Image -> Imagine

> 6A211E234529238AA323D4D562B35056

> Assume the application is encryptiong this value in CBC mode and PKCS#7 standard. The application receives this value, decrypts it and sends the response based on it. The perfect scenario for a padding oracle attack! 

Reviewer: encryptiong  -> encrypting

With this knowledge, there are 3 possible cases:

> 1. The ciphertext is valid - a successfull response is sent;

Reviewer: successfull -> successful

2. Invalid ciphertext (with improper padding) -  error message;

3. Valid ciphertext with invalid padding -  error message.

> To make this clear, if you can send different ciphertexts and result in different upon its decryption you know if the padding is valid or not. With this kind of knowdlege the attacker has the to decrypt any ciphertext.

Reviewer: result in different (output?)

Reviewer: has the (ability?)

Reviewer: knowdlege -> knowledge

To conclude, the goal is to find the correct ciphertext payload to get a successful response (200 OK), meaning we have the right value for the byte we want to decrypt. If it responds with an error (usually 500 error), it means the tampered ciphertext does not decrypt to a valid message. We can try other payloads to find a proper match.

Look for the example below, where the ciphertext is divided through the different blocks. 

> ![Ciphertext Block Division](img/cipher_padding_oracle.png "Ciphertext Block Division")

Reviewer: This image was an awesome idea. Do you think we can use it (and that makes sense to have) all the values in it? instead of just the ciphertext?

Reviewer: Also, since you are encrypting content in hex in the example, remember that every 2 chars represent a byte, which means that each block you representad, has only 4bytes instead of 8.

Also, if you want to use AES schema as an example, AES smaller block size is 16bytes

Author: do you mean the plaintext values too in the image? 
This is just a simple example, I think there is no need to use AES.

> As you can see the second cipher block drcyption output is directly XORed with the first cipher block which the attacker has control. So, let's try to decrypt the second cipher block.

Reviewer: decryption

> You can pickup a random C1 and substitutes it with the original ciphertext first block (**C1** || C2 || C3) and send to the oracle. The **X** points to the output of D(E,C2), the decrypted value of C2 which the value we are trying to figure out.

Reviewer: There is no mention of what is c1,c2,c3, D and E, although its easy to understand from context...

An example for the ciphertext payload is shown in the image below.

> The payload: **00000000**4529238AA323D4D562B35056

![Padding Oracle Attack Payload](img/payload_padding_oracle.png "Padding Oracle Attack Payload")

With C1 = 00000000, the cipher decrypted to the following plaintext value.

> C1 block

Reviewer: This part is quite nice, but if you agree with putting the values in the image above, doing the same thing here, would be awesome

> 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00

Decrypted Value

> 47 | D4 | 12 | 73 | A8 | 09 | F7 | **2C** 

Notice that that the last  byte of C1 decrypts to a plaintext with invalid padding, **2C**.

Let's try another value by incrementing the last byte.

C1 block

> 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | **01**

Decrypted value

> 47 | D4 | 12 | 73 | A8 | 09 | F7 | **2D** 

The output is another padding but with a different decrypted value **2D** since we change the last byte of C1.

> If we continue to increment the last of C1 (until FF) we will find for sure a value that matches a valid padding sequence. When this value is hitted it will produce a successfull response. This value is unique, so the response it will be different than the other 255 values.

Reviewer: hitted -> irregular verb, hit for past as well

> If we continue to increment the last of C1 (until FF) we will find for sure a value that matches a valid padding sequence. When this value is hitted it will produce a successfull response. This value is unique, so the response it will be different than the other 255 values.

Reviewer: successfull  -> successful

## The Basics

Firstly, to understand the _padding oracle attack_ also known as _Vaudenay attack_ it is important to know clearly the meaning of **padding** and **oracle**. 

### Padding

The CBC mode encrypts blocks with the same block length. As you may think, certainly not all the plaintext messages length are a multiple of the cipher block length. So, how can this problem be solved? How is a 14-byte message encrypted where cipher blocks are 8 bytes? One of the techniques used is **padding**.

The **padding** makes the plaintext longer with extra bytes to maintain each block with the same size allowing to encrypt a message of any length. For block ciphers, padding is applied according to the [PKCS#7](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#PKCS#5_and_PKCS#7) standard and [RFC 5652](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652#section-6.3). The standard says, the value to pad with is the number of bytes of padding that remains to fill a block. More technically, the message is expanded and extra bytes are added to the plaintext. That's how we have a complete block.

> Take in mind that one char is one byte in size. As an example, 8 chars are equal to 8 bytes. 

> To compare how this is performed with a human-readable plaintext, the following example uses strings (read [About Encodings](/docs/about-encodings) docs if you have any doubt). Let's try to encrypt `FAKEGUY`  with a block size of 8 bytes (or 8 characters). The message would be padded to `FAKEGUY\x01`. Why `x\01` at the end? According to the standard mentioned above, if there is one byte missing to complete the block, the message is padded with `\x01`. If there were two bytes the pad would be with `x\02`. Let's show a practical example of how this works with different message lengths and their pads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To compare how this is performed with a human-readable plaintext, the following example uses strings (read [About Encodings](/docs/about-encodings) docs if you have any doubt). Let's try to encrypt `FAKEGUY`  with a block size of 8 bytes (or 8 characters). The message would be padded to `FAKEGUY\x01`. Why `x\01` at the end? According to the standard mentioned above, if there is one byte missing to complete the block, the message is padded with `\x01`. If there were two bytes the pad would be with `\x02`. Let's show a practical example of how this works with different message lengths and their pads.
```

```
Block size: 8 bytes

Message: FAKEGUY --> 0x46414b45475559 (Hexadecimal)

     Message                              Padded Message
     
     0x46414b45475559 (7 bytes)   -->     0x46414b4547555901
     
     0x46414b454755   (6 bytes)   -->     0x46414b4547550202
     

>      0x46414b4547     (4 bytes)   -->     0x46414b454704040404

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     0x46414b4547     (5 bytes)   -->     0x46414b4547030303
```

```

Now with a message longer than 8 bytes.

```
Message: FAKEGUYROCKS --> 0x46414b45475559524f434b53 (12 bytes)

```
Becomes,
> 0x46414b45475559524f434b53**04040404**

The message `0x46414b45475559524f434b53` is 12 bytes (or 12 characters) long so, the message is split into two blocks with a total of 16 bytes (8 + 8 bytes). The padding was added due to in the last block was not complete. Thus, a pad of `04040404` was added because four bytes were remaining.

Additionally, if the message is a complete multiple of the size block, **padding is still added**, an empty block to be more precise. This looks a nonsense feature, I can feel your brain-blowing, right now.

> _Why adding a pad if the message length is a multiple of the block size?_ 

Well, imagine if your plaintext is literally `POTATO\x02\x02`. How could you distinguish a plaintext which content is `POTATO` (6 bytes) and `POTATO\x02\x02` (the `\x02\x02` at the end it seems  padding, but in reality it's part of the string). As a result, a full length block like `POTATOES` (8 bytes or chars) is padded to `POTATOES\x08\x08\x08\x08\x08\x08\x0\x08` which in hexadecimal is `0x504f5441544f45530808080808080808`.

### **Oracle**

> An Oracle is a system (e.g. Web Application) that accepts arbitrary ciphertexts and it gives **different responses** where the padding in a CBC-encrypted ciphertext is **valid** or **not**. This system will perform cryptographic operations on behalf of the user or attackers like a black box which returns success or error responses. In other words, a padding oracle takes encrypted data or ciphertext from the user, tries to decrypt it, then responds if the padding was correct or not. The attacker can use this information to decrypt the original message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Oracle is a system (e.g. Web Application) that accepts arbitrary ciphertexts and it gives **different responses** where the padding in a CBC-encrypted ciphertext is **valid** or **not**. This system will perform cryptographic operations on behalf of the user or attackers like a black box which returns success or error responses. In other words, a padding oracle takes encrypted data or ciphertext from the user, tries to decrypt it, then responds with an error if the padding is wrong. The attacker can use this information to decrypt the original message.
```

> Now you have the main knowledge to understand how this attack is performed. Let's get to the point.

## The Attack

To perform this attack is not needed to know the key, any plaintext or be an expert in math. Just access to the cipher text and to the decryption method is enough. Firstly, pay attention to the diagram shown below of how the CBC mode decrypts a given ciphertext.

> ![CBC Decryption](/documentation/img/cbc_decrypt.png "CBC Decryption")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![CBC Decryption](img/cbc_decrypt.png "CBC Decryption")
```

The most relevant point is how each block decryption ends. 

> **The ciphertext passes through the block cipher decryption and then its output is XORed with the previous ciphertext block**. The XOR of these two strings with the correct padding gives the plaintext message.

Imagine you have made a random request to a web application you use with the following **encrypted cookie value** and you want to decrypt it to know its content:

> 6A211E23A323D4D54529238A

Assume the application is encrypting this value in CBC mode and PKCS#7 standard. The application receives this value, decrypts it, and sends the response based on it. The perfect scenario for a padding oracle attack! 

With this knowledge, there are 3 possible cases:

1. The ciphertext is valid - a successful response is sent;

2. Invalid ciphertext (with improper padding) -  error message;

3. Valid ciphertext with invalid padding -  error message.

To make this clear, if you can send different ciphertexts and result in different outputs upon its decryption, you know if the padding is valid or not. With this kind of knowledge, the attacker has the ability to decrypt any ciphertext.

> To conclude, the goal is to find the correct ciphertext payload to get a successful response (200 OK), meaning we have the right value for the byte we want to decrypt. If it responds with an error (usually 500 error), it means the tampered ciphertext does not decrypt to a valid message. We can try other payloads to find a proper match.

Reviewer: I wouldn't use the status codes here as they are not the whole truth... you may have an error with a 200 for example... really depends on the implementation

Look for the example below, where the ciphertext is divided through the different blocks. 

> ![Ciphertext Block Division](/documentation/img/cipher_padding_oracle.png "Ciphertext Block Division")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Ciphertext Block Division](img/cipher_padding_oracle.png "Ciphertext Block Division")
```

Now is the easy part. We know the C1 last byte outputs valid padding (**2D**) and we know the plaintext output which is **01**. Now we can infer the value of X, the output of D(E,C3). If you have noticed, we can do that because the X value XORed with C2 outputs the plaintext. At this point, you may know XOR is a commutative operation. 

If,

> Plaintext = C2 XOR X

Then,

> C2 XOR Plaintext = X

And that's how we get the value of X (D(K,C3)).

In our example,

> 0x01 = 0x2D XOR X

So,

> X = 0x2D XOR 0x01

Finally,

> X = 0x2C

0x01 is plaintext[15] and 0x2D is C2[15].

We know the value of X (2C) and we are able to deduce the final value of the plaintext last byte. Simply XOR X with the previous original ciphertext block which is **6A211E23**. Confused? Compare these steps with the diagram of the CBC decryption shown above.

At this time, the last byte of C3 is known; to find the rest of it, we can work backward through the entire block until every byte of X function is cracked, thus letting us decrypt the C3 plaintext one byte at a time. For the other blocks, it is just applying the same method to crack the full message.

> ## Put the attack in practice

Reviewer: you skipped a step here.
First you decrypt the ciphertext to know what's the content, and see if you can manipulate.

Also make sure to explain what is the payload received/manipulated, and how you found it in the app

There are a bunch of available scripts over the internet to automate this attack. We will using [this](https://github.com/KishanBagaria/padding-oracle-attacker) tool to get the flag. 

According to the tool documentation, we need the **target URL**, **ciphertext encoding**, **block size** and the **HTTP code error**.

Example:

> poattack encrypt http://localhost:2020/decrypt?ciphertext= hex:666f6f2062617220f09fa684 16 400

* **poattack** - name of the program
* **encrypt** -  the operation
* **http://localhost:2020/decrypt?ciphertext=** - URL
* **hex:666f6f2062617220f09fa684** - encoding and payload
* **16** - block size
* **400** - HTTP error

In the end execution, the output should the similar to:

> ![poattack script output](/documentation/img/poattack.png "poattack script output")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![poattack script output](img/poattack.png "poattack script output")
```

Now you have the flag!

## Lesson Learned

* A Padding Oracle Attack is a well known devastating attack against CBC and it will try to **break anything that uses CBC mode**.

> * In the context of an application, it depends on how the user implementation of CBC mode because, if an attacker can modify the ciphertext or can trigger an error, there are high chances he can break the encrypted message.

Reviewer: "In the context of an application, it depends on how the user implementation of CBC mode " something is missing here

> * [Encrypt and MAC your data](https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/38942/how-to-protect-against-padding-oracle-attacks).

Reviewer: lets try to use more 'trustworthy' sources like owasp...
Also, you can add other encryption schemas like GCM that handle the MAC behind scenes.
Finally may also be worth it to explain that before decrypting mac should be validated

# Padding Oracle Attack

For this section is important that you read and understand the [XOR docs](/docs/xor).

## The Basics

Firstly, to understand the _padding oracle attack_ also known as _Vaudenay attack_ it is important to know clearly the meaning of **padding** and **oracle**.

### Padding

The CBC mode encrypts blocks with the same block length. As you may think, certainly not all the plaintext messages length are a multiple of the cipher block length. So, how this problem can be solved? How a 14-byte message is encrypted where cipher blocks are 8 bytes? One of the techniques used is **padding**.

The **padding** makes the ciphertext longer than the plaintext to maintain each block with the same size allowing to encrypt a message of any length. For block ciphers, padding is applied according to the [PKCS#7](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Padding_(cryptography)#PKCS#5_and_PKCS#7) standard and [RFC 5652](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5652#section-6.3). The standard says, the value to pad with is the number of bytes of padding that remains to fill a block. More technically, the message is expanded and extra bytes are added to the plaintext in order to complete a block. 

> For example, let's try to encrypt `FAKEGUY` with a block size of 8 bytes. The message would be padded to `FAKEGUY\x01`. Why `\x01` at the end? According to the standard mentioned above, if there is one byte to complete the block, the message is padded with `\x01`. If there were two bytes the pad would be with `\x02`. Let's show a practical example of how this works with different message lengths and their pads.

Reviewer: You're talking in bytes, but you are padding characters. 
Each char is 2 bytes :p
